The Domestic Violence Division of the Circuit Court of Cook County is in a surprisingly pretty brick building. No one there seems to stare much if you sob while you are waiting for your lawyer. The guard who asked me to remove the pen in my ponytail (so I would clear the metal detector) did so with impressive grace. Everyone is gentle.

The price of admission is abuse. In this court, your ex is referred to as the Respondent. I was there because my ex beat me.

If anyone had asked me before my beating if I would defend myself when attacked, I would have said yes, of course I would.

But I didn’t hit the Respondent back. It never occurred to me that someone who claimed to love me would hit me so deliberately and repeatedly. As he hit me, my field of vision shrank to the space inhabited by his swinging fists, and I was too busy shielding my face to do much. It turns out protecting your face takes a great deal of effort when someone is hellbent on wrecking it.

I remember thinking, “Getting punched really hurts,” as if this were some profound epiphany.

When I found myself cornered by a phone, I didn’t hesitate to pick it up and dial 911. I didn’t think about the legal or personal ramifications. I didn’t think at all. But when I said, “Help!” and started rattling off the address, he wrenched the phone away, which was when I fled — out to the elevator and down to the building’s front steps, where I waited, shuddering, for the cops.

In five minutes they arrived, eight of them. Half went up to talk to him and half stayed with me. They wanted me to press charges. They wanted to take me to the hospital. They were kind and didn’t question my taste in boyfriends. They patted my bruised back and muttered gentle nothings, like a posse of protective big brothers. They insisted on idling in their cars until a friend came to fetch me.

It was triage, at first. Then the people closest to me kicked in.

“You should press charges,” they told me.

I went to the hospital the next day, worried because I could not really open my mouth or see well. I needed a written record. The doctor was shocked and impressed that nothing was broken in my face. It felt like a win.

“You need to get a restraining order,” my friends said. “You should move home. You should move, period. He has guns.”

I said no to everything, even though I couldn’t eat, sleep or speak to anyone without crumpling. I couldn’t sit or lean against anything comfortably because my head was still a battered, crusty mess. I had night terrors, day terrors and panic attacks.

Not even spackling paste would hide the bruises, so after one attempt with concealer I gave up and wore my battered face out. I told everyone who needed to know, which astounded the Respondent.

He called me, offended, and said, “You told your family?” As if this was somehow an affront to him.

I looked up every unpronounceable word on my hospital chart. My injuries included blunt head trauma, burst blood vessels in my eyes, swelling of the brain, bruised jaw, bruised ribs, defensive bruises on both arms, bruises on my back and swelling on the rear of my skull from where his fists sent me flying into various hard surfaces.

In trying to persuade me to file charges, my father said, “What would you tell your little sisters to do?”

I did eventually petition the Domestic Violence Courthouse for an emergency order of protection, which it granted. This was easy to get after the Respondent put into writing details of how he would like to torture, mutilate and kill me, and then sent these details to me in the mail. He ended that written missive by reiterating his love.